title: AI与机器人技术融合全面提速
title_translation: The integration of AI and robotics technology is accelerating
date: 
author: 
origin: china
url: http://kpzg.people.com.cn/n1/2025/0707/c404214-40515764.html
text: 近日，记者参加了两年一届的2025年德国慕尼黑自动化展，深刻感受到自动化技术在人工智能（AI）加持下更加智能，驱动工业生产与管理不断变革。AI与机器人技术的融合发展在诸多领域全面提速，展现未来工作生活新方式。多家公司推出了新一代人形机器人，不过从现场表现来看，人形机器人在技术和实际应用等方面都还有很多工作要做。
自动化是现代生产的支柱，也是创新的引擎。众多参展商的展示表明，机器正越来越多地承担起几年前被认为过于复杂的任务。例如，谷歌旗下的Intrinsic公司将AI引入计算机数控机床市场。相关厂商推出的机床管理解决方案，可用基于AI的感知技术检测原料，并利用自动化运动和抓取规划功能，实现零件拾取和放置流程的自动化。机器操作员通过简单的界面管理流程、切换作业和导入零件，无需定制夹具和机器人编程。

机器视觉被广泛用于工业质量控制和流程控制，展会中有130多家参展商来自机器视觉和图像处理领域。主办方组织了40多场关于机器人视觉、AI视觉以及视觉组件和解决方案的演示。对于视觉提供商来说，能提供2D、3D、线扫描和区域扫描相机技术及其合适的组件变得越来越重要。3D视觉感知传感器正成为新一代智能硬件实现空间感知和泛化操作的关键支撑。

AI和数字化不断拓展传统自动化的边界。例如，自动化解决方案帮助节约资源和减少排放。灵活控制流程和实时优化能耗的智能系统也不再是遥远的前景。在新的健康技术领域，诸如实验室自动化、医疗技术支持和医疗保健物流流程的优化表明，围绕这一主题的多样性和社会相关性已经出现。
尽管基于AI的机器人技术还不能大规模使用，但AI已让机器人的使用变得更加简单灵活。很多厂商已把生成式AI集成到机器人编程中，例如通过直观的语音控制，使自动化解决方案更容易获得。从协作机器人开始，市场上有越来越多的机器人可在没有专业知识的情况下使用。

智能自动化解决方案供应商库卡希望从根本上重新定义机器人的控制方式，并推出了可扩展、可灵活调整的机器人操作系统iiQKA.OS2。这个软件和控制器平台将人工智能与视觉系统结合，使机器人变得更加灵活，而无需进行复杂的编程。库卡还与微软合作，开发了一个AI聊天机器人，可将自然语言命令转化为程序代码。此外，库卡希望通过新的云平台为中小型企业的数字化生产铺平相对经济的道路。

日本机器人制造商安川电机则展示了“动态安全区”的概念。机器人完全不需要防护围栏即可运行，并能保证安全性和高生产率。只有在人们真正接近工作区域时，相关软件才会动态调整机器人的运动，降低速度或停止运行。
展会上，德国初创企业NEURA Robotics高调发布了其人形机器人4NE1 Gen 3。据介绍，这款机器人身高近1.8米，可举起高达100公斤的重物，拥有先进的AI技术和360度全方位感知能力，无需安全笼即可与人类安全协作。这款专为家庭、工作场所和服务环境设计的机器人计划于今年晚些时候上市。NEURA雄心勃勃的目标是到2030年交付500万台机器人。

与此同时，在沃达丰、SAP和英伟达的支持下，NEURA推出了一个开放的软件平台。它不仅用于连接机器人，还能通过应用商店的方式，开发、分发和部署机器人应用程序。在这个开放式机器人生态系统中，机器人可分享它们从实际用例中学习到的经验。开发者的设想是一个机器人能做什么，其他机器人可跟着学。相关参与者可贡献并销售自己的模块和应用程序。

人形机器人可为制造业自动化提供新的动力。随着技术进步，这些机器人对制造企业的吸引力将会越来越大。德国汽车制造商已在积极研究这个问题。宝马在其位于美国加州的斯巴达堡工厂测试美国人形机器人公司Figure的技术。梅赛德斯—奔驰也在其位于柏林的数字化生产创新中心使用美国供应商Apptronik的阿波罗人形机器人。不过，截至目前，实际应用中与人形机器人这种相对较新的技术相关的挑战还很多。
展会上，埃斯顿、库卡和新松等中国机器人制造商大规模展示了自己的产品和技术。埃斯顿公司的参展人员告诉科技日报记者，在德国埃尔福特的宁德时代工厂，埃斯顿的机器人已投入电池组装。通过垂直整合供应链，以及高度自动化运营，埃斯顿能以非常经济的方式提供机器人。

自2014年以来，中国一直是全球最大的机器人市场。近年来，全球销售的机器人有一半都在中国安装。在人形机器人供应链中，超过一半的上市公司来自中国。德国的初创公司也从中国采购内置力传感器的机械臂和关节等部件。这表明，中国已成为机器人和AI领域的重量级全球玩家，有望在塑造智能机器人的未来方面发挥重要作用。

不过，德国媒体认为，中国机器人制造商进入德国和欧洲市场仍任重道远。中国制造商还需要学习和了解当地的标准，并打消用户对本地服务可靠性的怀疑。此外，在德国和欧洲，人工智能受到了严格监管。对于人形机器人来说，也还有很多问题没有解决，人们对数据安全问题还有很多保留。
translation:
Recently, the reporter attended the biennial 2025 Munich Automation Show in Germany, and deeply felt that automation technology has become more intelligent with the support of artificial intelligence (AI), driving the continuous transformation of industrial production and management. The integrated development of AI and robotics technology has accelerated in many fields, showing a new way of working and living in the future. Many companies have launched a new generation of humanoid robots, but judging from the on-site performance, there is still a lot of work to be done in terms of technology and practical application of humanoid robots.
Automation is the backbone of modern production and the engine of innovation. The displays of many exhibitors show that machines are increasingly taking on tasks that were considered too complex a few years ago. For example, Intrinsic, a subsidiary of Google, introduced AI into the computer numerical control machine tool market. The machine tool management solutions launched by relevant manufacturers can detect raw materials with AI-based perception technology, and use automated motion and grasping planning functions to automate the part picking and placement process. Machine operators manage processes, switch jobs and import parts through a simple interface without the need for custom fixtures and robot programming.
Machine vision is widely used in industrial quality control and process control. There are more than 130 exhibitors from the field of machine vision and image processing at the exhibition. The organizer organized more than 40 demonstrations on robot vision, AI vision, and vision components and solutions. For vision providers, it is becoming increasingly important to provide 2D, 3D, line scan and area scan camera technologies and their suitable components. 3D visual perception sensors are becoming the key support for the new generation of intelligent hardware to achieve spatial perception and generalized operation.
AI and digitalization are constantly pushing the boundaries of traditional automation. For example, automated solutions help save resources and reduce emissions. Intelligent systems that flexibly control processes and optimize energy consumption in real time are no longer a distant prospect. In the new field of health technology, such as laboratory automation, medical technology support and the optimization of healthcare logistics processes show that diversity and social relevance around this topic have already emerged.
Although AI-based robotics is not yet available on a large scale, AI has made the use of robots simpler and more flexible. Many manufacturers have integrated generative AI into robot programming, such as through intuitive voice control, making automation solutions more accessible. Starting with collaborative robots, there are more and more robots on the market that can be used without professional knowledge.
Kuka, a supplier of intelligent automation solutions, hopes to fundamentally redefine the way robots are controlled and has launched the scalable and flexibly adjustable robot operating system iiQKA.OS2. This software and controller platform combines artificial intelligence with a visual system to make robots more flexible without the need for complex programming. Kuka has also worked with Microsoft to develop an AI chatbot that converts natural language commands into program code. In addition, Kuka hopes to pave a relatively economical path for digital production for small and medium-sized enterprises through a new cloud platform.
Japanese robot manufacturer Yaskawa Electric demonstrated the concept of "dynamic safety zone". The robot can operate without protective fences and ensure safety and high productivity. Only when people really approach the working area will the relevant software dynamically adjust the robot's movement, reduce speed or stop operation.
At the exhibition, German startup NEURA Robotics launched its humanoid robot 4NE1 Gen 3. According to reports, the robot is nearly 1.8 meters tall, can lift up to 100 kilograms, has advanced AI technology and 360-degree all-round perception, and can safely collaborate with humans without a safety cage. This robot, designed for home, workplace, and service environments, is scheduled to be available later this year. NEURA's ambitious goal is to deliver 5 million robots by 2030.
At the same time, with the support of Vodafone, SAP and NVIDIA, NEURA launched an open software platform. It is not only used to connect robots, but also to develop, distribute and deploy robot applications through the application store. In this open robot ecosystem, robots can share their experience learned from actual use cases. Developers imagine what a robot can do, and other robots can follow suit. Relevant participants can contribute and sell their own modules and applications.
Humanoid robots can provide new impetus for automation in the manufacturing industry. As technology advances, these robots will become more and more attractive to manufacturers. German automakers are already actively researching this issue. BMW is testing technology from the American humanoid robot company Figure at its Spartanburg plant in California, USA. Mercedes-Benz is also using the Apollo humanoid robot from the American supplier Apptronik at its Digital Production Innovation Center in Berlin. However, as of now, there are still many challenges associated with the relatively new technology of humanoid robots in practical applications.
At the exhibition, Chinese robot manufacturers such as Estun, Kuka and Siasun displayed their products and technologies on a large scale. An exhibitor from Estun told Science and Technology Daily that Estun's robots have been put into battery assembly at the CATL factory in Erfurt, Germany. Through vertically integrated supply chains and highly automated operations, Estun can provide robots in a very economical way.
China has been the world's largest robot market since 2014. In recent years, half of the robots sold worldwide have been installed in China. In the humanoid robot supply chain, more than half of the listed companies are from China. German startups also source components such as robotic arms and joints with built-in force sensors from China. This shows that China has become a heavyweight global player in the field of robotics and AI and is expected to play an important role in shaping the future of intelligent robots.
However, German media believes that Chinese robot manufacturers still have a long way to go to enter the German and European markets. Chinese manufacturers also need to learn and understand local standards and dispel users' doubts about the reliability of local services. In addition, artificial intelligence is strictly regulated in Germany and Europe. For humanoid robots, there are still many unresolved issues, and people still have many reservations about data security issues.