title: 从舞台到客厅：宇树科技创始人谈中国机器人产业迭代
title_translation: From the stage to the living room: Yushu Technology founder talks about the iteration of China's robotics industry
date: 
author: 
origin: china
url: http://www.news.cn/tech/20250620/06b4e2baf9fa489e8c6ca92aa214d14b/c.html
text: 新华社记者袁震宇、商意盈、朱涵

　　“未来一到两年，机器人将具备整理房间、端送物品等简单、泛化的商用和家用能力。”中国机器人企业宇树科技创始人王兴兴日前在接受新华社记者专访时说，这家公司近年来正持续提升机器人的操作能力，让机器人能为人类“干活”。

　　“最近一年，我们升级了机器人手臂的操作能力，比如装配零部件、开门等，都是为了让机器人帮助人类从繁重劳动中解脱出来。”王兴兴说。

　　被誉为“杭州六小龙”之一的宇树科技创办于2016年，是世界知名的民用机器人公司，也是全球首家公开零售高性能四足机器人的公司，机器人的全球销量领先。

　　今年1月，宇树科技的人形机器人身着小红袄、手持红手帕扭秧歌登上春晚舞台，迅速火爆出圈。5月，全球首个以人形机器人为参赛主体的格斗竞技赛事在杭州开赛，宇树科技的人形机器人在擂台上的格斗比拼呈现多个“名场面”。

　　人形机器人通过跳舞、格斗等表演性活动展示技术能力的同时，也引发人们对技术实用性、商业化路径及行业泡沫的讨论。

　　对此，王兴兴认为，在人形机器人进入生产生活的“终极目标”实现之前，通过表演能够展示机器人的真实发展情况，也能产生部分商业价值。

　　“机器人格斗赛使用了我们最新一代的控制技术，机器人能够完成出拳、回旋踢等复杂组合动作，动作衔接流畅，稳定性较好。”王兴兴说，未来机器人格斗赛也有望成为像足球和篮球这样风靡全球的体育赛事。

　　宇树科技于2023年启动人形机器人项目，得益于在四足机器人领域长期的技术沉淀，只用了半年时间便推出首款双足机器人。

　　基于人工智能（AI）技术的发展，宇树科技于2024年推出的人形机器人已具备超越常人的灵活性，可以完成高难度动态动作。今年以来，人形机器人通过数据捕捉、强化学习等AI技术，“学会”了功夫、侧空翻、鲤鱼打挺……引发广泛关注。
　以宇树科技为代表，在人形机器人的全球赛场上，“中国力量”正日益崛起。摩根士丹利日前发布的研究报告《人形机器人100：绘制人形机器人价值链图谱》预测，到2050年，中国人形机器人市场规模将达6万亿元，人形机器人总量将达5900万台。

　　中国国家市场监管总局发布的数据显示，截至2024年12月底，中国共有45.17万家智能机器人产业企业，注册资本共计64445.57亿元，企业数量较2020年底增长206.73%，较2023年底增长19.39%，呈稳健上扬态势。

　　今年3月，中国已有人形机器人进入5G智慧工厂开展多台、多场景、多任务的协同实训。人形机器人什么时候才能从舞台真正走进车间，甚至客厅？

　　“目前看，机器人的大规模、批量化使用，还有待软硬件层面的进一步突破。”王兴兴说，如果将硬件和AI比作机器人的身体与大脑，硬件上人形机器人需要在追求轻巧化的同时实现低成本和性能可靠，更大的挑战则在于AI大模型。

　　“距离人形机器人进入生产空间、家庭生活的‘ChatGPT’时刻到来，还需要一点时间。”王兴兴说，国内外机器人厂家和科研机构都在通过不同路径探索，目前正处于突破的“前夜”。

　　在王兴兴看来，人形机器人会在工业及商用领域率先打开局面。他表示，AI和通用机器人技术的诞生，将推动新一轮“工业革命”，也会改变甚至重构生产关系和人机伦理，需要提前思考法律法规体系完善、人机协作安全保障、劳动力技能重塑等问题。

　　“我从小就希望用科技来改变世界。正如‘宇树科技’这个名字，不仅代表着一家企业，我希望点亮一棵在广阔宇宙中枝繁叶茂的‘科技树’。”他说。
translation: 　"In the next one to two years, robots will have simple, generalized commercial and household capabilities such as tidying up rooms and delivering items." Wang Xingxing, founder of Chinese robot company Yushu Technology, said in an exclusive interview with Xinhua News Agency reporters recently that the company has been continuously improving the operational capabilities of robots in recent years so that robots can "work" for humans.

　　"In the past year, we have upgraded the operating capabilities of the robot arms, such as assembling parts and opening doors, so that robots can help humans free themselves from heavy labor," said Wang Xingxing.


　　In January this year, Yushu Technology's humanoid robot, wearing a little red coat and holding a red handkerchief, danced the Yangko on the Spring Festival Gala stage and quickly became popular. In May, the world's first fighting competition with humanoid robots as the main participants was held in Hangzhou, and Yushu Technology's humanoid robots presented many "famous scenes" in the fighting competition on the ring.

　　While humanoid robots demonstrate their technological capabilities through performance activities such as dancing and fighting, they also spark discussions on the practicality of the technology, commercialization paths and industry bubbles.

　　In this regard, Wang Xingxing believes that before the "ultimate goal" of humanoid robots entering production and life is achieved, performances can demonstrate the true development of robots and generate some commercial value.

　　"The robot fighting competition uses our latest generation of control technology. The robots are able to complete complex combination movements such as punching and roundhouse kicking. The movements are smoothly connected and the stability is good." Wang Xingxing said that in the future, robot fighting competitions are also expected to become a globally popular sporting event like football and basketball.

　　Yushu Technology launched the humanoid robot project in 2023. Thanks to its long-term technological accumulation in the field of quadruped robots, it took only half a year to launch the first bipedal robot.

　　Based on the development of artificial intelligence (AI) technology, the humanoid robot launched by Yushu Technology in 2024 has the flexibility beyond that of ordinary people and can perform difficult dynamic movements. This year, humanoid robots have "learned" kung fu, somersaults, and somersaults through AI technologies such as data capture and reinforcement learning, which has attracted widespread attention.

　　Represented by Yushu Technology, "Chinese power" is rising in the global arena of humanoid robots. Morgan Stanley's research report "Humanoid Robots 100: Mapping the Humanoid Robot Value Chain" recently released predicts that by 2050, the scale of China's humanoid robot market will reach 6 trillion yuan, and the total number of humanoid robots will reach 59 million units.

　　Data released by China's State Administration for Market Regulation show that as of the end of December 2024, there were 451,700 intelligent robot industry enterprises in China, with a total registered capital of 6,444.57 billion yuan. The number of enterprises increased by 206.73% from the end of 2020 and by 19.39% from the end of 2023, showing a steady upward trend.

　　In March this year, humanoid robots entered 5G smart factories in China to carry out collaborative training of multiple robots, multiple scenarios and multiple tasks. When will humanoid robots really move from the stage to the workshop and even the living room?

　　"At present, the large-scale and batch use of robots still requires further breakthroughs in software and hardware." Wang Xingxing said that if hardware and AI are compared to the body and brain of a robot, humanoid robots need to achieve low cost and reliable performance while pursuing lightweight hardware. The greater challenge lies in the large AI model.

　　"It will take some time before humanoid robots enter production spaces and family life's 'ChatGPT' moment arrives." Wang Xingxing said that robot manufacturers and research institutions at home and abroad are exploring through different paths and are currently on the "eve" of a breakthrough.

　　In Wang Xingxing's view, humanoid robots will take the lead in opening up the industrial and commercial fields. He said that the birth of AI and general robotics technology will promote a new round of "industrial revolution", and will also change and even reconstruct production relations and human-machine ethics. It is necessary to think ahead about the improvement of the legal and regulatory system, the safety of human-machine collaboration, and the reshaping of labor skills.

　　"Since I was a child, I have wanted to use technology to change the world. Just as the name 'Yushu Technology' represents more than just a company, I hope to light up a 'technology tree' that flourishes in the vast universe," he said.