title: 提“智”向新，奔向未来——当前机器人产业观察
title_translation: Advancing intelligence and moving towards the future - Observations on the current robotics industry
date: 
author: 
origin: china
url: http://www.news.cn/fortune/20250506/9220cd55101c44359b33bcb90d28232b/c.html
text:  机器人踏着“猫步”在T台走秀、进入工厂协助造车，教育、医疗、城市管理等领域都有了机器人的帮助……今天，机器人已得到广泛应用，走进你我的生活。

  伴随着技术日新月异，机器人产业加快提“智”向新。特别是今年以来，从中央到地方，对培育具身智能、发展智能机器人等作出一系列部署。政策端、市场端同频共振，新赛道日渐开阔，产业发展如火如荼。

  有机构预测，“十五五”时期，我国机器人产业规模将增长至4000亿元左右。未来已来、机遇无限。
 五一假期前，北京平谷金海湖碧波岛度假区，智能机器人上岛“入职”。巡航、导览，与游客互动间，文旅有了新的“打开方式”。

  碧波岛度假区负责人表示，智能机器人让旅游变得更有“智趣”，也帮助景区精细化管理，增添了文旅产业的“智”动力。

  从参赛马拉松，到更智能地在工厂“忙活”，这个春天，机器人火热“出圈”，整个产业踏上风口。
 新产品、新应用密集推出——

  3月11日，智元机器人发布双足智能交互人形机器人灵犀X2，集齐运动、交互、作业等功能；仅隔一天，3月12日，优必选与北京人形机器人创新中心联合发布全尺寸科研教育人形机器人，计划于二季度开始交付。

  从一个个专业展会上，能够更直观感受到创新的“浓度”。以近日于深圳举行的机器人全产业链接会为例，工业机器人实现从“机械臂”到“智慧脑”的升级，协作机器人演示智能操作方案，从“灵巧手”到“电子皮肤”，参会企业亮出“绝活”，不断刷屏。
 市面频频上“新”，生产热潮涌动。“电子皮肤”销量增长10倍，直驱电机1月订单量已超去年一半，新一代老人智能看护机器人走俏市场……在广东东莞松山湖，多家机器人企业斩获大量订单。

  一季度，我国工业机器人、服务机器人产量达到14.9万套和260.4万套，同比分别增长26%和20%。
 产业持续升级、加速进阶——

  “几乎每周都在看项目、找项目，才能了解到最新动向。”一位创投机构负责人感叹，当前机器人的创新“不以年计，而以天计”。

  以刚跑完马拉松的机器人“旋风小子”为例，它的上一代产品于2024年5月会走，6月能跑，7月完成双腿跳和单腿跳，10月开启跳舞技能……“成长”速度超乎想象。
不只是人形机器人，工业机器人、服务机器人也在大踏步向前。

  在中国一拖总装线涂装间内，拖拉机底盘喷漆作业正在进行：只见机械臂灵动转向，漆膜厚度误差被控制在毫米级。技术人员告诉记者，融入智能技术和3D模型后，机械臂可以自动生成喷涂路径，并根据现场温湿度调整参数。“工业机器人已经能够感知生产环境的变化，实现智能工艺的自适应。”

  移动操作机器人在航天航空、半导体等制造环节的应用超千台；防爆工业机器人在轨道交通装备等制造环节实现规模应用；手术机器人辅助完成复杂远程手术……一个个标志性突破的背后，是产业向新提质的写照。
业界发力，政策举措给力。

  我国设立600亿元规模的国家人工智能基金，加快布局投资项目；工业和信息化部推动“机器人+”供需对接和推广应用，提升产业链韧性；央地共建具身智能机器人、人形机器人等创新中心，推动产业集聚……

  重庆提出围绕“存算一体”芯片等推动核心技术攻关，北京宣布将在2年内释放超万台机器人应用机会，全国多地积极行动，由研发侧到应用端的布局走深走实。

  赛迪研究院发布报告预计，“十五五”时期，我国工业机器人渗透率将大幅提升，服务机器人不断进化，人形机器人由资源拉动转为市场驱动。

  “一边是新技术提速产业迭代，一边是制造业、服务业转型缔造巨大空间，国内机器人产业步入快速发展期。”中国机械工业联合会秘书长宋晓刚说。

  机器人火热的背后，有整个产业链的厚积薄发。

  记者调研发现，从材料、零部件到电子系统、总装集成，国内机器人制造体系的日臻完备，有力支撑了产业的求新求变。

  走进苏州绿的谐波传动科技股份有限公司的生产车间，只见机械臂从操作箱内取出一个个原料，加工、检测、清洗、涂油，制成谐波减速器中的柔轮。
谐波减速器被称为机器人的“关节”，对技术、工艺的要求极高，曾长期被国外垄断。这家“小巨人”企业持续攻克材料选型、柔性轴承等技术难题，将传动误差控制在10弧秒以内。绿的谐波总经理张雨文说，企业正瞄准具身智能新趋势，研发一体化机器人关节，为构建更复杂的机器人系统提供支撑。

  从国产突破到国产替代，今天，国产谐波减速器在国内市场份额已经超过40%。

  不只是减速器。近年来，我国持续加大对机器人全产业的强链补链：摸清薄弱环节，围绕加强核心技术攻关等作出系统部署；面向行业前沿领域、重点环节启动“揭榜挂帅”，张榜求贤；从科技企业孵化器，到首台（套）、首批次、首版次等推广应用支持政策，打通产学研用，集产业合力攻产业短板。

  一个个点上的突破有力增强了链上的韧性，伴随着关键环节国产化进程的加快，中国“钢铁侠”有了更坚实的支撑。

  看产业，链上创新“多点开花”——

  浙江灵巧智能科技有限公司的5指量产版灵巧手，实现对环境和操作对象的精准测量与精细感知；雷赛智能的高性能伺服电机，提升了机器人运动控制能力；宁德时代的高能量密度电池可为机器人提供更强劲动力……从机械臂、传感器到电池、本体制造，几乎机器人的每个部位，都有国产供应商在发挥重要作用。
看市场，应用扩围加速迭代——

  “我们正与国产品牌共成长。”在采访中，多位企业负责人表达了这样的观点。

  我国制造业机器人密度达到每万名工人470台，庞大的制造业体量为产业应用提供丰富场景。特别是近年来，以“新三样”为代表的优势产业壮大，产业链话语权提升，带动一批国产机器人“上岗”应用，市场的历练加速推动国内供应商成长。
 这是深圳南山“机器人谷”的一幕：帕西尼的触觉传感器可直接供应给一街之隔的优必选，跨维智能的仿真数据能实时输入智平方的训练系统。从激光雷达、机械臂，到灵巧手，供应链就在家门口，“上午研发、下午测试、晚上迭代”的协同效应初显。

  “我国已形成覆盖上下游各领域的机器人全产业链布局，自主化率、产品竞争力、重点行业渗透率得到进一步提升。”国投招商先进制造产业研究院资深研究员宋洪军说，虽然当前仍面临运动控制算法、高精度传感器等瓶颈，一些环节“卡脖子”尚未根本解决，但政策与市场的协同效应推动产业链向深布局。“机器人产业正经历从‘零件组装’到‘智慧共生’的质变。”
 走进位于北京首钢园的人形机器人数据训练中心，只见工程师们身着穿戴设备，通过遥操作方式，控制机器人准确完成浇水、插花、叠衣服等动作。

  中心负责人张钦锋告诉记者，高质量的数据集是机器人理解世界的入口。当前的一个重要任务就是加快实训的“密度”，快速积累数据，推动演进升级。

  以“数”赋能，为机器人打造“智慧大脑”——

  今年以来，多地宣布加强具身智能训练中心建设，瞄准数据缺乏难题，一个个“机器人技校”“数据工厂”加快落地。与此同时，产业界也在探索新技术，拓展数据获取新方式。

  北京银河通用机器人有限公司尝试通过合成数据驱动技术，用物理仿真器生产的数据训练机器人。企业创始人王鹤说，目前已累积了数千万级的场景数据以及数十亿级的动作数据。

  晶泰科技首席执行官马健说，企业研发的智能自主实验平台可将数据收集能力提高40倍，已部署超300台机器人实验工站，积累了大量标准化、高质量的实验数据。

  此外，数字“底座”也在进一步夯实。国家数据局明确，将系统推进全国一体化算力网建设，推动区域、行业数据基础设施互联互通。工业和信息化部提出，将加强通用大模型和行业大模型的研发布局，加快建设工业领域高质量的数据集。

  “‘人工智能+’行动到哪里，高质量数据集的建设和推广就要到哪里。”国家数据局有关负责人说，将充分调动社会各方力量，持续增加数据供给。

  瞄向未来，强化基础研究、前瞻布局——

  在上海“模速空间”大模型创新生态社区，无问芯穹通过自研技术，实现多种大模型算法在多种芯片上的协同运行；稀宇科技不断突破多模态大模型技术，加速AI智能体的开发……这里“上下楼就是上下游”的模式，推动着来自底层技术、应用研发、场景设计等环节的入驻企业通力合作，一批前沿技术加快涌现。
 在北京亦庄，国家地方共建具身智能机器人创新中心发布通用具身智能平台“慧思开物”，实现单个软件系统在机械臂、轮式机器人等多构型本体上的兼容。将技术成果面向行业开源开放，博采众人之长，加快关键共性技术的合力攻坚。
迈向高质量发展，机器人产业仍有不少难题待解。比如，基础理论研究和基础技术攻关存在短板弱项；人形机器人硬件成本较高，制约规模化应用等。

  从AI模型底座到高算力芯片，从类脑智能到下一代通信，业界、学界正加大跨学科跨领域融合创新，积极整合产业资源，协力探索攻关。

  年初，我国牵头制定世界首个养老机器人国际标准发布；不久前，首批人形机器人技术要求系列国家标准获批立项……立标准、树规范，不断推动着产业稳健向前。
 “在这场培育新质生产力的‘长跑’中，既要加强科技供给，也要在战略规划、人才培养等方面下大功夫，特别是要优化产业布局、强化规范建设。”国家地方共建具身智能机器人创新中心总经理熊友军说，把步子走得更稳更坚实，才能让机器人向前的每“一小步”，都成为推动产业发展的“一大步”，实现从“跑完半马”到“奔”向未来的跨越。
translation:  Robots walk on the catwalk and enter factories to assist in car manufacturing. Robots are helping in education, medical care, urban management and other fields. Today, robots have been widely used and have entered into your and my lives.

  With the rapid development of technology, the robotics industry is accelerating its "intelligence" and innovation. Especially since this year, from the central government to local governments, a series of arrangements have been made to cultivate embodied intelligence and develop intelligent robots. The policy side and the market side resonate at the same frequency, the new track is gradually opening up, and the industry is developing in full swing.

  Some institutions predict that during the 15th Five-Year Plan period, the scale of my country's robot industry will grow to about 400 billion yuan. The future is here and the opportunities are endless.
Before the May Day holiday, intelligent robots were put on duty at the Bibo Island Resort in Jinhai Lake, Pinggu, Beijing. Cruising, guiding, and interacting with tourists, cultural tourism has a new way of opening up.

  The person in charge of the Bibo Island Resort said that intelligent robots make tourism more "smart and interesting", and also help with the refined management of scenic spots, adding "smart" power to the cultural and tourism industry.

  From participating in marathons to working more intelligently in factories, robots are becoming increasingly popular this spring, and the entire industry is on the cusp of the trend.
On March 11, Zhiyuan Robotics released the Lingxi X2, a bipedal intelligent interactive humanoid robot that integrates functions such as movement, interaction, and operation; just one day later, on March 12, UBTECH and the Beijing Humanoid Robot Innovation Center jointly released a full-size humanoid robot for scientific research and education, which is scheduled to start delivery in the second quarter.

  From professional exhibitions, we can more intuitively feel the "concentration" of innovation. Take the recent Robot Industry Linkage Conference held in Shenzhen as an example, industrial robots have achieved the upgrade from "mechanical arms" to "smart brains", collaborative robots have demonstrated intelligent operation solutions, from "dexterous hands" to "electronic skin", and participating companies have shown their "unique skills" and kept refreshing the screen.
 The market is full of new products, and the production boom is surging. The sales of "electronic skin" has increased 10 times, the orders for direct-drive motors in January have exceeded half of last year, and the new generation of smart elderly care robots are popular in the market... In Songshan Lake, Dongguan, Guangdong, many robot companies have won a large number of orders.

  In the first quarter, my country's output of industrial robots and service robots reached 149,000 sets and 2.604 million sets, up 26% and 20% year-on-year respectively.

 "I have to look at and search for projects almost every week to learn about the latest trends." A head of a venture capital institution lamented that current innovation in robots "is not measured in years, but in days."

  Take the robot "Tornado Boy" that just finished a marathon as an example. Its previous generation product learned to walk in May 2024, run in June, complete double-leg and single-leg jumping in July, and start dancing skills in October... The "growth" speed is beyond imagination.
 Not only humanoid robots, but also industrial robots and service robots are making great strides forward.

  In the painting room of the assembly line of China First Tractor, the chassis painting operation of the tractor is in progress: the mechanical arm can be seen turning flexibly, and the error of the paint film thickness is controlled at the millimeter level. The technician told reporters that after integrating intelligent technology and 3D models, the mechanical arm can automatically generate the spraying path and adjust the parameters according to the temperature and humidity on site. "Industrial robots are already able to sense changes in the production environment and realize the self-adaptation of intelligent processes."

  More than a thousand mobile operating robots are used in aerospace, semiconductor and other manufacturing links; explosion-proof industrial robots are used on a large scale in the manufacturing of rail transit equipment and other links; surgical robots assist in completing complex remote surgeries... Behind each landmark breakthrough is a reflection of the industry's move towards new quality improvement.
 my country has set up a 60 billion yuan national artificial intelligence fund to speed up the layout of investment projects; the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology has promoted the supply and demand docking and promotion and application of "robot +" to enhance the resilience of the industrial chain; the central and local governments have jointly built innovation centers such as embodied intelligent robots and humanoid robots to promote industrial agglomeration...

  Chongqing proposed to promote the research and development of core technologies around "storage and computing in one" chips, and Beijing announced that it will release more than 10,000 robot application opportunities within two years. Many places across the country have taken active actions to deepen and implement the layout from the research and development side to the application side.

  The report released by the China Academy of Information and Communications Technology predicts that during the 15th Five-Year Plan period, the penetration rate of industrial robots in my country will increase significantly, service robots will continue to evolve, and humanoid robots will shift from being resource-driven to being market-driven.

  "On the one hand, new technologies are accelerating industrial iterations, and on the other hand, the transformation of manufacturing and service industries is creating huge space. The domestic robotics industry has entered a period of rapid development," said Song Xiaogang, Secretary-General of the China Machinery Industry Federation.
  Behind the popularity of robots is the accumulation of strength of the entire industrial chain.

  The reporter’s investigation found that the domestic robot manufacturing system is becoming more and more complete, from materials and parts to electronic systems and final assembly integration, which has strongly supported the industry’s pursuit of innovation and change.

  Walking into the production workshop of Suzhou Green Harmonic Drive Technology Co., Ltd., you will see robotic arms taking out raw materials from the operating box, processing, testing, cleaning, and oiling them to make the flexible wheel in the harmonic reducer.
 Harmonic reducers are called the "joints" of robots. They have extremely high requirements for technology and craftsmanship and have long been monopolized by foreign countries. This "little giant" company continues to overcome technical difficulties such as material selection and flexible bearings to control the transmission error within 10 arc seconds. Zhang Yuwen, general manager of Green Harmonic, said that the company is targeting the new trend of embodied intelligence and developing integrated robot joints to provide support for building more complex robot systems.

  From domestic breakthroughs to domestic substitution, today, domestic harmonic reducers have accounted for more than 40% of the domestic market share.

  It is not just the reducer. In recent years, my country has continued to strengthen and supplement the entire robot industry chain: identify weak links, make systematic arrangements around strengthening core technology research, etc.; launch the "unveiling the list and appointing the leaders" campaign for cutting-edge fields and key links in the industry, and post a list of talents; from technology enterprise incubators to the first unit (set), first batch, first edition and other promotion and application support policies, we will connect production, education, research and application, and unite the industry to jointly tackle the shortcomings of the industry.

  Breakthroughs at each point have effectively enhanced the resilience of the chain. With the acceleration of the localization process of key links, China's "Iron Man" has a more solid support.

  Looking at the industry, innovation on the chain is "blooming in many places"——

  The mass-produced 5-finger dexterous hand of Zhejiang Lingqiao Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd. realizes accurate measurement and fine perception of the environment and operating objects; the high-performance servo motor of Leadshine Intelligent improves the robot's motion control capabilities; the high-energy density battery of CATL can provide more powerful power for the robot... From robotic arms, sensors to batteries, and body manufacturing, domestic suppliers play an important role in almost every part of the robot.
 "We are growing together with domestic brands." In the interview, many business leaders expressed this view.

  The density of robots in my country's manufacturing industry has reached 470 per 10,000 workers, and the huge manufacturing industry provides rich scenarios for industrial applications. In recent years, the advantageous industries represented by the "new three things" have grown stronger, and the voice of the industrial chain has been enhanced, which has led to a number of domestic robots being put into use. The market experience has accelerated the growth of domestic suppliers.

  This is a scene in Shenzhen Nanshan "Robot Valley": Pasini's tactile sensors can be directly supplied to UBTECH across the street, and the simulation data of Cross-Dimension Intelligence can be input into Zhifang's training system in real time. From laser radar, robotic arms, to dexterous hands, the supply chain is right at the doorstep, and the synergy effect of "R&D in the morning, testing in the afternoon, and iteration at night" is beginning to emerge.

  "my country has formed a full industrial chain layout of robots covering all upstream and downstream fields, and the autonomy rate, product competitiveness, and penetration rate of key industries have been further improved." Song Hongjun, a senior researcher at the State Investment and Merchants Advanced Manufacturing Industry Research Institute, said that although there are still bottlenecks such as motion control algorithms and high-precision sensors, and some links have not been fundamentally solved, the synergy of policies and markets has promoted the in-depth layout of the industrial chain. "The robotics industry is undergoing a qualitative change from 'parts assembly' to 'smart symbiosis'."

  Robotics is an emerging industry and a key industry supporting digital upgrades. In the face of the rapid technological competition, we must take the initiative and seize the opportunity.
  Walking into the humanoid robot data training center located in Beijing’s Shougang Park, we saw engineers wearing wearable devices and using remote control to control robots to accurately complete actions such as watering, arranging flowers, and folding clothes.

  Zhang Qinfeng, director of the center, told reporters that high-quality data sets are the gateway for robots to understand the world. An important task at present is to speed up the "density" of practical training, quickly accumulate data, and promote evolution and upgrading.

  Empowering with "numbers" to create a "smart brain" for robots——

  Since the beginning of this year, many places have announced to strengthen the construction of embodied intelligence training centers, aiming at the problem of data shortage, and "robot technical schools" and "data factories" have been accelerated. At the same time, the industry is also exploring new technologies and expanding new ways to obtain data.

  Beijing Galaxy General Robotics Co., Ltd. attempts to train robots with data produced by physical simulators through synthetic data-driven technology. Wang He, the company's founder, said that it has accumulated tens of millions of scene data and billions of action data.

  Ma Jian, CEO of Jingtai Technology, said that the intelligent autonomous experiment platform developed by the company can increase data collection capabilities by 40 times. It has deployed more than 300 robotic experiment stations and accumulated a large amount of standardized, high-quality experimental data.

  In addition, the digital "foundation" is also being further consolidated. The National Bureau of Data has made it clear that it will systematically promote the construction of a national integrated computing network and promote the interconnection of regional and industry data infrastructure. The Ministry of Industry and Information Technology has proposed that it will strengthen the research and development layout of general large models and industry large models and accelerate the construction of high-quality data sets in the industrial field.

  "Wherever the 'AI+' action goes, the construction and promotion of high-quality data sets must go there." A relevant person in charge of the National Data Bureau said that they will fully mobilize the forces of all sectors of society to continuously increase data supply.

  Aiming at the future, strengthening basic research and forward-looking layout——

  In the Shanghai "Mosu Space" large model innovation ecological community, Wuwen Xinqiong uses its self-developed technology to achieve the coordinated operation of multiple large model algorithms on multiple chips; Xiyu Technology continues to make breakthroughs in multimodal large model technology and accelerate the development of AI intelligent bodies... The "going up and down the stairs is upstream and downstream" model here promotes the cooperation of resident companies from underlying technology, application research and development, scenario design and other links, and a number of cutting-edge technologies are emerging rapidly.
 In Yizhuang, Beijing, the National and Local Co-constructed Embodied Intelligent Robot Innovation Center released the universal embodied intelligent platform "Huisi Kaiwu", which realizes the compatibility of a single software system on multi-configuration bodies such as robotic arms and wheeled robots. The technical achievements will be open to the industry, drawing on the strengths of many people and accelerating the joint efforts to tackle key common technologies.
 Towards high-quality development, the robotics industry still has many problems to solve. For example, there are shortcomings in basic theoretical research and basic technology research; the hardware cost of humanoid robots is relatively high, which restricts large-scale application.

  From AI model bases to high-computing chips, from brain-like intelligence to next-generation communications, the industry and academia are increasing cross-disciplinary and cross-field integration and innovation, actively integrating industrial resources, and working together to explore and tackle key problems.

  At the beginning of the year, my country took the lead in formulating and releasing the world's first international standard for elderly care robots; not long ago, the first batch of national standards in the technical requirements series for humanoid robots were approved... Establishing standards and establishing norms are constantly pushing the industry forward steadily.
 "In this 'long-distance race' to cultivate new quality productivity, we must not only strengthen the supply of science and technology, but also work hard in strategic planning, talent training, etc., especially optimizing the industrial layout and strengthening standardized construction." Xiong Youjun, general manager of the National and Local Co-built Embodied Intelligent Robot Innovation Center, said that only by taking more steady and solid steps can every "small step" forward of the robot become a "big step" to promote industrial development, and achieve the leap from "running a half marathon" to "running" into the future.