title: 人形机器人加速进化
title_translation: Humanoid robots are evolving faster
date: 
author: 
origin: china
url: http://www.news.cn/tech/20250420/564dfbf2634249079707051a3fa39efd/c.html
text: 4月19日，全球首个人形机器人半程马拉松赛在北京举行。在21.0975公里的赛道上，首次“人机共跑”，来自高校、科研机构、企业的20支机器人队伍参赛。

  此前的蛇年春晚上，10多台宇树机器人身着花棉袄登上舞台，与真人舞者一起扭秧歌、转手绢，引起各方高度关注。人们惊呼，人形机器人来到普通人生活了。
  造一台像人一样的机器，是人类由来已久的憧憬。从古书《列子·汤问》中偃师造“人偶”的记载到1973年世界上第一台人形机器人WABOT-1在日本早稻田大学诞生，人们对人形机器人的探索从未停止。近半个世纪以来，这一行业发展起起伏伏，世界各国推出多种人形机器人，但总体发展较慢。

  如今，为什么人形机器人的发展会突然加速？
 “每走几步就能遇上一个人形机器人。”3月底，参加中关村论坛年会的嘉宾表示。年会期间，10多家企业的近百台人形机器人活跃在迎宾、交流、主持、表演等场景。
 从春节至今的两个多月里，社交媒体上时常出现人形机器人的爆款视频，展示前空翻、后空翻、骑自行车等绝技，刷新人们对具身智能的认知。

  具身智能，是近年进入公众视野的新词汇。它强调智能系统与身体的紧密结合，通过身体与环境的交互来实现智能行为。与其区别的概念是无身体的智能，比如，没有物理身体、完全依赖于计算和数据处理来实现智能行为的聊天机器人。

  人形机器人是具身智能的典型应用形态之一。今年全国两会上，政府工作报告明确将建立未来产业投入增长机制，培育包括具身智能在内的未来产业。
 一些工厂、大学、科研机构、人工智能公司等正在率先使用人形机器人。

  优必选最近发布的视频里，在极氪汽车工厂，两台高1.72米的机器人Walker S1面对面站着，它们同时向对方点了点头，随后张开手臂，协同搬运一个长1.2米、宽50厘米、高40厘米的物料盒。

  “机器人的工作效率约为熟练工人的70%。”乐聚公司创始人冷晓琨说，目前已进入车厂实训的机器人“夸父”，干不了像打精密螺丝等高级技工承担的复杂工作，而是干繁重、泛化性强、高度重复的活，如搬运大小、颜色、重量、尺寸各不相同的箱子，分拣不同形状的零配件等。

  暂未打算让机器人进工厂的宇树科技，近期在京东、速卖通等海内外电商平台陆续“上新”。宇树产品有两类：四足机器狗主要面向C端消费者，人形机器人主要面向开发者。

  宇树市场总监黄嘉玮表示，去年宇树人形机器人销售到100多个国家与地区，核心用户是大学、科研院所、科技AI公司等。用户在宇树硬件上做二次开发。

  全国多地围绕人形机器人的产业布局在加速。目前，北京、上海、深圳、重庆等10余个地方政府已建立和筹备建立产业基金。

  在投资界，机器人公司热度也日益升温。据创业投资和新兴科技行业数据服务商IT桔子数据显示，今年前3个月，具身智能赛道的50多家企业获得超60亿元融资。
  1973年，早稻田大学推出世界第一款全尺寸人形机器人WABOT-1，每走一步需要45秒；本世纪初，日本本田公司发布人形机器人ASIMO（阿西莫），能上下楼梯；2013年，美国波士顿动力公司发布的人形机器人Atlas运动能力惊人……

  尽管出现过几次技术迭代，但人形机器人行业一度陷入沉寂，直到近年开始加速。这是为何？
  北京航空航天大学机器人研究所名誉所长王田苗表示，长期以来机器人开发以编程为基础，2022年AI大模型问世，能模拟人类的大脑，具有泛化迁移等能力，推动人形机器人这一新物种的发展。

  浙江人形机器人创新中心主任、浙江大学教授熊蓉表示，传统机器人研究范式依赖对人类运动肌理的数学建模。如今，人们可通过大规模数据采集和神经网络训练让机器人掌握更多隐性知识，举一反三。

  人工智能赋能机器人，也是产业界的共识。

  在沈阳新松机器人自动化股份有限公司总裁张进看来，推动人形机器人发展的最大力量是新一代人工智能，让人形机器人拥有“大脑”，逐步具备泛化能力。

  多名受访专家提到2022年业内一个标志性事件：特斯拉正式发布人形机器人Optimus（擎天柱）。马斯克展示它在汽车工厂搬运箱子、抓取金属棒的视频，并表示将规模化生产。
 清华大学机器人控制实验室主任赵明国观察到，特斯拉将汽车工业的供应链优势引入机器人领域，大幅降低硬件成本。

  人形机器人主要由“大脑”“小脑”和“本体”三部分协同支配。以让人形机器人接一杯水为例——要拆解指令、识别环境、规划路径，就要求“大脑”具备多层级决策能力；要完成走、拿、倒、递等具体动作，则需“小脑”精准控制。

  今年以来亮相的一些产品，展现了机器人关键技术的提升。春晚表演的宇树机器人，被认为“小脑发达”，展示出很高的运动控制水平。北京人形机器人创新中心发布的“慧思开物”平台，则试图构建兼容多本体多场景、具有强大泛化能力的通用软件系统。

  业界认为，当下限制人形机器人发展最大的瓶颈仍是“大脑”。

  哈尔滨工业大学计算学部副主任、人工智能学院执行院长张伟男说，在“大脑”方面，海内外还未出现像大模型那样的突破性产品。软件方面，面向跨场景的高质量、大规模数据比较缺失。硬件方面，面向机器脑的专用算力芯片还需进一步研发和普及。

  星海图人工智能联合创始人、清华大学交叉信息学院助理教授许华哲的主要研究方向是具身智能的基础大模型。他以做饭为例，描述理想中的机器人“大脑”能达到的水平。

  “我想让机器人做一道松鼠鳜鱼，因为操作难度足够大——鱼是活的，又滑又黏，还有颗粒状的鳞片。不仅处理活鱼，还得会改刀、油炸、炒糖色、浇汁、摆盘。”许华哲说，至少要过十几年才能吃到机器人做的这道菜。

  近来，人形机器人端茶倒水、在葡萄上穿针等视频在社交媒体广泛传播，不少人由此认为：很快可以买一台机器人当保姆了。多名业界专家对此态度谨慎。

  北京钢铁侠科技有限公司创始人张锐的团队，2021年入选参与中国宇航员人形机器人项目。他坦言，相比进太空，人形机器人进家庭的难度更高、周期更长。因为家是一个复杂的环境——可能有老人、小孩和猫狗；不同地面的平整度、摩擦力不一，人形机器人行走时有倾倒风险。他认为，未来进入家庭的人形机器人不能是现有机械、电子结构的堆叠，而要借助新材料形成新一代的肌肉、骨骼。

  在冷晓琨看来，未来进入家庭的人形机器人，必须像家电一样便宜、像博士一样聪明。他说，机器人的成本降低只是时间问题，但怎么把AI智能运用到本体上，是研究的难点。
上海临港和奉贤区交界处一个工业园区，上海智元新创技术有限公司一期工厂坐落于此。这里被业界称为上海首座人形机器人的量产工厂，今年1月第1000台通用具身机器人下线。工厂分两层，一楼是生产和组装，二楼是整机测试。

  “就像人有200多块骨骼一样，双足人形机器人A2全身有400多个零部件。”智元合伙人、具身业务部总裁姚卯青说，机器人不是组装在一起就完成，而只是刚刚开始。为了避免之后行走不稳或摔倒，它必须经过一道又一道的分项测试，比如单腿负重30公斤的深蹲，要进行2000次以上的测试。
 除了人形机器人初创企业，还有两类企业在入局研发人形机器人：一类是领先的科技企业，如华为、科大讯飞等，它们从人工智能角度切入，为机器人提供“智能”；另一类是新能源车企，如小鹏、小米等，主要基于人形机器人和智能汽车在电池、芯片、传感器等供应链上可以迁移，在自动驾驶技术和AI模型的应用上有相似之处。

  “人形机器人虽然最早出现在国外，但真正产业化落地最可能是在中国，因为中国有非常完整的产业链，所有需要的核心零部件和技术都有团队研究。”张进表示，有的专注做“大脑”，有的擅长做双足、胳膊等，大家会合力形成一个完整健康的产业生态。

  小鹏汽车创始人何小鹏表示，公司目前重点研发“大脑”所需的物理世界大模型，现在的人形机器人接近自动驾驶L2初级阶段，期望尽早实现可量产并有商业价值的L3能力。

  人形机器人产业加速，也得益于我国机器人行业发展几十年，在工业、服务等领域积累大量技术和客户。去年，我国工业机器人市场销量超过29万台，在汽车和电子行业应用程度最高。

  主营工业机器人的广东拓斯达科技股份有限公司创始人吴丰礼说：“未来要做人形机器人的底气，就在于企业已有20多万家制造业客户，研制出的人形机器人产品可以第一时间给现有客户应用。”

  张进表示，新松20多年一直聚焦工业机器人，积累了丰富的工业知识和经验。一旦工业领域出现人形机器人的大量应用场景，企业的人形机器人团队可迅速跟进。

  业界认为，工程师红利是我国发展人形机器人的重要优势之一。我国已培养出全球规模最大、结构最完整的工程师队伍。2016年教育部批准 “机器人工程”作为本科专业，至今已有超过300所高校开设机器人工程本科专业。

  政策层面，国家到地方都明确加速部署。工信部2023年印发的《人形机器人创新发展指导意见》提出，人形机器人有望成为继计算机、智能手机、新能源汽车之后的颠覆性产品。去年七部门印发的《关于推动未来产业创新发展的实施意见》，人形机器人排在“创新标志性产品”专栏第一位。近年，北京、上海、深圳、杭州等地已出台支持政策。

  人形机器人通往未来的路径已日渐清晰，人工智能+先进制造，正在让中国走在机器人技术革命的世界前沿。
人形机器人会在哪些领域率先应用？

  工信部指导意见提出三方面场景：服务特种领域需求，打造制造业典型场景，加快民生及重点行业推广。

  专家表示，一些条件恶劣、场景危险的作业，比如民爆、救援等，就需要人形机器人，可以降低工作危险性。虽然制造业是重要场景，但目前人形机器人承担的仍是简单任务，效率均不及一般工人。

  业界普遍认为，人形机器人要进入更广泛的真实应用，必须先进入“职业技能培训学校”。
 上海智元机器人的数据采集中心就是这样一所学校。约4000平方米的空间里，上百名数据采集员头戴VR眼镜、手持操作手柄，“手把手”教机器人做家务——叠衣服、收拾碗筷、倒茶、超市收银……每个动作需要机器人重复数百次。

  智元创始人彭志辉解释说，与大语言模型需要的文字、图片、视频等数据不同，机器人需要去三维世界跟有形物体进行交互，这种数据不可能从互联网获取，只能通过大量投入人力、物力，采集海量真实的机器人交互数据。

  与此同时，北京、上海的国家地方共建人形机器人创新中心也建立起人形机器人“技校”。

  冷晓琨认为，这些训练场把实际生产生活的场景抽象出来，通过人工操作机器人完成任务，采集多维数据，然后将数据输入具身智能模型，成熟后再将模型部署到机器人，使它获得新技能，这是人形机器人未来几年发展的核心工作。

  不少人担心“会被人形机器人抢饭碗”，对此一名厂长告诉记者，前年招了约900人，去年招了450多人，今年只招了300出头，还存在不少岗位空缺，确实有些活缺人干。

  熊蓉表示，人形机器人如果得到大规模应用，意味着可以取代人类从事危险、重复和乏味的工作，有望解决未来社会劳动力短缺的难题。

  未来人形机器人会给人类工作和生活带来极大便利，也可能给原有社会秩序带来挑战。

  人们会担心机器人不知何时会失控，人类的权利在不知不觉中被侵犯，还担忧机器人的行为无法追溯和问责。

  中国工程院院士、机器人与工业自动化专家王天然认为，这些问题的解决方式直接决定了公众对于机器人及其技术的接受程度。如何对机器人的行为加以约束，应该成为机器人设计者、生产者、应用者乃至社会管理者都关注的问题。

  北京大学教授刘哲认为，尽管人形机器人要具备与人相当的自主性还很遥远，但其自主性会给人类社会带来多重伦理困境。因此，在进行伦理治理时，不仅要在设计机器人环节有伦理考量，还要有一个具备社会共识的伦理框架。

  这场人机共舞才刚刚开始，它的舞步将关乎文明未来的律动。
translation: On April 19, the world's first humanoid robot half marathon was held in Beijing. On the 21.0975-kilometer track, 20 robot teams from universities, research institutes, and enterprises participated in the first "human-robot co-run".

  In the previous Spring Festival Gala of the Year of the Snake, more than 10 Yushu robots dressed in flowery cotton jackets took to the stage, dancing the Yangko dance and spinning handkerchiefs with real dancers, which attracted great attention from all parties. People exclaimed that humanoid robots have entered the lives of ordinary people.
 Building a human-like machine is a long-standing dream of mankind. From the record of Yanshi making a "doll" in the ancient book "Liezi·Tangwen" to the birth of the world's first humanoid robot WABOT-1 at Waseda University in Japan in 1973, people have never stopped exploring humanoid robots. Over the past half century, the development of this industry has been ups and downs, and countries around the world have launched a variety of humanoid robots, but the overall development has been slow.

  Why is the development of humanoid robots suddenly accelerating today?
 "You can meet a humanoid robot every few steps." At the end of March, a guest attending the Zhongguancun Forum Annual Meeting said. During the annual meeting, nearly 100 humanoid robots from more than 10 companies were active in scenes such as welcoming guests, communicating, hosting, and performing.
 In the more than two months since the Spring Festival, popular videos of humanoid robots have often appeared on social media, demonstrating stunts such as front flips, back flips, and bicycle riding, refreshing people's understanding of embodied intelligence.

  Embodied intelligence is a new term that has entered the public eye in recent years. It emphasizes the close integration of intelligent systems and the body, and the realization of intelligent behavior through the interaction between the body and the environment. The concept that is different from it is disembodied intelligence, such as chatbots that have no physical body and rely entirely on computing and data processing to achieve intelligent behavior.

  Humanoid robots are one of the typical application forms of embodied intelligence. At this year's National People's Congress, the government work report clearly stated that it would establish a mechanism for increasing investment in future industries and cultivate future industries including embodied intelligence.
Some factories, universities, research institutes, artificial intelligence companies, etc. are taking the lead in using humanoid robots.

  In a video recently released by UBTECH, two 1.72-meter-tall Walker S1 robots stood face to face at the Zeekr Automotive Factory. They nodded to each other at the same time, then opened their arms and worked together to carry a material box that was 1.2 meters long, 50 centimeters wide and 40 centimeters high.

  "The work efficiency of robots is about 70% of that of skilled workers." Leng Xiaokun, founder of Leju Company, said that the robot "Kuafu" that has entered the car factory for training cannot do complex work undertaken by senior technicians such as driving precision screws, but can only do heavy, generalized and highly repetitive work, such as carrying boxes of different sizes, colors, weights and dimensions, and sorting spare parts of different shapes.

  Yushu Technology, which has no plans to bring robots into factories, has recently launched new products on domestic and overseas e-commerce platforms such as JD.com and AliExpress. Yushu has two types of products: four-legged robot dogs are mainly for C-end consumers, and humanoid robots are mainly for developers.

  Huang Jiawei, marketing director of Yushu, said that last year, Yushu humanoid robots were sold to more than 100 countries and regions, and the core users were universities, research institutes, technology AI companies, etc. Users do secondary development on Yushu hardware.

  The industrial layout of humanoid robots is accelerating in many places across the country. At present, more than 10 local governments including Beijing, Shanghai, Shenzhen and Chongqing have established or are preparing to establish industrial funds.

  In the investment community, the popularity of robotics companies is also increasing. According to data from IT Juzi, a data service provider for venture capital and emerging technology industries, in the first three months of this year, more than 50 companies in the embodied intelligence track received more than 6 billion yuan in financing.
 In 1973, Waseda University launched the world's first full-size humanoid robot WABOT-1, which takes 45 seconds to walk each step. At the beginning of this century, Honda of Japan released the humanoid robot ASIMO, which can go up and down stairs. In 2013, Boston Dynamics of the United States released the humanoid robot Atlas, which has amazing athletic ability...

  Despite several technological iterations, the humanoid robot industry was dormant until it began to accelerate in recent years. Why?
 Wang Tianmiao, honorary director of the Robotics Institute of Beihang University, said that robot development has long been based on programming. In 2022, a large AI model will be released that can simulate the human brain and have capabilities such as generalization and migration, which will promote the development of a new species of humanoid robots.

  Xiong Rong, director of the Zhejiang Humanoid Robot Innovation Center and professor at Zhejiang University, said that the traditional robotics research paradigm relies on mathematical modeling of human movement texture. Today, people can use large-scale data collection and neural network training to enable robots to master more implicit knowledge and draw inferences from one example.

  It is also a consensus in the industry that artificial intelligence empowers robots.

  In the view of Zhang Jin, president of Shenyang Siasun Robot & Automation Co., Ltd., the biggest force driving the development of humanoid robots is the new generation of artificial intelligence, which gives humanoid robots a "brain" and gradually acquires generalization capabilities.

  Many experts interviewed mentioned a landmark event in the industry in 2022: Tesla officially released the humanoid robot Optimus. Musk showed a video of it moving boxes and grabbing metal bars in a car factory, and said it would be mass-produced.
 Zhao Mingguo, director of the Robotics and Control Laboratory at Tsinghua University, observed that Tesla introduced the supply chain advantages of the automotive industry into the field of robotics, significantly reducing hardware costs.

  Humanoid robots are mainly controlled by the "brain", "cerebellum" and "body". Take the example of letting a humanoid robot get a glass of water - to decompose instructions, identify the environment, and plan the path, the "brain" needs to have multi-level decision-making capabilities; to complete specific actions such as walking, taking, pouring, and handing over, the "cerebellum" needs precise control.

  Some products unveiled this year have demonstrated the improvement of key robotics technologies. The Yushu robot that performed at the Spring Festival Gala was considered to have a "well-developed cerebellum" and demonstrated a high level of motion control. The "Huisi Kaiwu" platform released by the Beijing Humanoid Robot Innovation Center attempts to build a general software system that is compatible with multiple entities and multiple scenarios and has strong generalization capabilities.

  The industry believes that the biggest bottleneck restricting the development of humanoid robots is still the "brain".

  Zhang Weinan, deputy director of the School of Computer Science and executive dean of the School of Artificial Intelligence at Harbin Institute of Technology, said that in terms of "brain", there are no breakthrough products like large models at home and abroad. In terms of software, high-quality, large-scale data for cross-scenario use is relatively lacking. In terms of hardware, dedicated computing chips for machine brains need further research and development and popularization.

  Xu Huazhe, co-founder of Xinghaitu AI and assistant professor at the School of Interdisciplinary Information Sciences at Tsinghua University, focuses on the basic large-scale model of embodied intelligence. He used cooking as an example to describe the level that an ideal robot "brain" can achieve.

  "I want the robot to cook a squirrel mandarin fish because it is difficult to operate - the fish is alive, slippery and sticky, and has granular scales. Not only do you have to deal with live fish, but you also have to know how to cut, fry, stir-fry sugar color, pour sauce, and arrange the dish." Xu Huazhe said that it will take at least a dozen years before people can eat this dish made by a robot.

  Recently, videos of humanoid robots serving tea and threading needles on grapes have been widely circulated on social media, leading many people to believe that they will soon be able to buy a robot to serve as a babysitter. However, many industry experts are cautious about this.

  Zhang Rui, founder of Beijing Iron Man Technology Co., Ltd., and his team were selected to participate in the Chinese Astronaut Humanoid Robot Project in 2021. He admitted that compared to going into space, it is more difficult and takes longer for humanoid robots to enter the home. Because the home is a complex environment - there may be elderly people, children, cats and dogs; the flatness and friction of different floors are different, and there is a risk of humanoid robots tipping over when walking. He believes that humanoid robots entering homes in the future cannot be a stack of existing mechanical and electronic structures, but must use new materials to form a new generation of muscles and bones.

  In Leng Xiaokun's view, humanoid robots that will enter households in the future must be as cheap as household appliances and as smart as robots. He said that it is only a matter of time before the cost of robots is reduced, but how to apply AI intelligence to the main body is a difficult point in research.

  The first phase of the factory of Shanghai Zhiyuan Xinchuang Technology Co., Ltd. is located in an industrial park at the junction of Shanghai Lingang and Fengxian Districts. It is known in the industry as the first mass production factory of humanoid robots in Shanghai. In January this year, the 1,000th universal embodied robot rolled off the production line. The factory is divided into two floors, the first floor is for production and assembly, and the second floor is for whole machine testing.

  "Just like a human has more than 200 bones, the bipedal humanoid robot A2 has more than 400 parts." Yao Maoqing, partner of Zhiyuan and president of the embodied business department, said that the robot is not finished after being assembled, but just the beginning. In order to avoid unstable walking or falling in the future, it must go through one sub-item test after another, such as squatting with a single leg load of 30 kilograms, which must be tested more than 2,000 times.
  In addition to humanoid robot start-ups, there are two other types of companies that are involved in the research and development of humanoid robots: one is leading technology companies, such as Huawei, iFlytek, etc., which approach from the perspective of artificial intelligence and provide "intelligence" for robots; the other is new energy vehicle companies, such as Xiaopeng and Xiaomi, which are mainly based on the migration of humanoid robots and smart cars in the supply chain of batteries, chips, sensors, etc., and have similarities in the application of autonomous driving technology and AI models.

  "Although humanoid robots first appeared abroad, they are most likely to be truly industrialized in China, because China has a very complete industrial chain, and all the necessary core components and technologies are researched by teams." Zhang Jin said that some focus on making the "brain", some are good at making feet, arms, etc., and everyone will work together to form a complete and healthy industrial ecology.

  He Xiaopeng, founder of Xpeng Motors, said that the company is currently focusing on developing large models of the physical world required for the "brain". The current humanoid robot is close to the initial stage of L2 autonomous driving, and it is hoped that L3 capabilities that can be mass-produced and have commercial value will be achieved as soon as possible.
 The acceleration of the humanoid robot industry is also due to the development of my country's robotics industry over the past few decades, which has accumulated a large number of technologies and customers in the fields of industry, services, etc. Last year, the sales volume of my country's industrial robot market exceeded 290,000 units, with the highest degree of application in the automotive and electronics industries.

  Wu Fengli, founder of Guangdong Topstar Technology Co., Ltd., which specializes in industrial robots, said: "The confidence to make humanoid robots in the future lies in the fact that the company already has more than 200,000 manufacturing customers, and the humanoid robot products developed can be used by existing customers as soon as possible."

  Zhang Jin said that SIASUN has been focusing on industrial robots for more than 20 years and has accumulated rich industrial knowledge and experience. Once a large number of application scenarios of humanoid robots appear in the industrial field, the company's humanoid robot team can quickly follow up.

  The industry believes that the engineer bonus is one of the important advantages of my country in developing humanoid robots. my country has cultivated the world's largest and most complete engineering team. In 2016, the Ministry of Education approved "Robotics Engineering" as an undergraduate major. So far, more than 300 universities have opened undergraduate majors in Robotics Engineering.

  At the policy level, both the national and local governments have clearly accelerated deployment. The "Guiding Opinions on the Innovation and Development of Humanoid Robots" issued by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology in 2023 proposed that humanoid robots are expected to become disruptive products after computers, smartphones, and new energy vehicles. In the "Implementation Opinions on Promoting the Innovation and Development of Future Industries" issued by seven departments last year, humanoid robots ranked first in the "Innovation Iconic Products" column. In recent years, Beijing, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Hangzhou and other places have introduced supporting policies.

  The path to the future of humanoid robots has become increasingly clear. Artificial intelligence + advanced manufacturing are putting China at the forefront of the world's robotics revolution.
 In which fields will humanoid robots be used first?

  The guiding opinions of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology put forward three scenarios: serving the needs of special fields, creating typical scenarios for the manufacturing industry, and accelerating promotion in people's livelihood and key industries.

  Experts say that some operations with harsh conditions and dangerous scenes, such as civil explosions and rescue operations, require humanoid robots to reduce the danger of work. Although manufacturing is an important scene, humanoid robots are currently only responsible for simple tasks and are less efficient than ordinary workers.

  The industry generally believes that if humanoid robots are to be put into more widespread real-world applications, they must first enter "vocational skills training schools."
 The data collection center of Shanghai Zhiyuan Robotics is such a school. In a space of about 4,000 square meters, hundreds of data collectors wear VR glasses and hold operating handles to teach robots how to do housework - folding clothes, clearing dishes, pouring tea, and cashiering in supermarkets... Each action requires the robot to repeat hundreds of times.

  Peng Zhihui, founder of Zhiyuan, explained that unlike the text, pictures, videos and other data required by large language models, robots need to interact with tangible objects in the three-dimensional world. This kind of data cannot be obtained from the Internet and can only be obtained by investing a lot of manpower and material resources to collect massive amounts of real robot interaction data.

  At the same time, the national and local jointly built humanoid robot innovation centers in Beijing and Shanghai have also established humanoid robot "technical schools".

  Leng Xiaokun believes that these training grounds abstract the scenes of actual production and life, complete tasks through manual operation of robots, collect multi-dimensional data, and then input the data into the embodied intelligent model. After the model is mature, it will be deployed to the robot to enable it to acquire new skills. This is the core work of the development of humanoid robots in the next few years.

  Many people are worried that "their jobs will be taken away by humanoid robots." In this regard, a factory manager told reporters that they recruited about 900 people the year before last, more than 450 people last year, and only a little over 300 people this year. There are still many vacancies and there are indeed some jobs that lack people to do.

  Xiong Rong said that if humanoid robots are used on a large scale, they can replace humans in dangerous, repetitive and boring work, and are expected to solve the problem of labor shortage in future society.

  In the future, humanoid robots will bring great convenience to human work and life, but may also bring challenges to the original social order.

  People worry that robots may get out of control at any time, that human rights may be violated without their knowledge, and that the actions of robots cannot be traced or held accountable.
 Wang Tianran, an academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering and an expert in robotics and industrial automation, believes that the way these problems are solved directly determines the public's acceptance of robots and their technologies. How to constrain the behavior of robots should be a concern for robot designers, manufacturers, users and even social managers.

  Professor Liu Zhe of Peking University believes that although it is still a long way to go for humanoid robots to have the same autonomy as humans, their autonomy will bring multiple ethical dilemmas to human society. Therefore, when conducting ethical governance, not only should there be ethical considerations in the design of robots, but there should also be an ethical framework with social consensus.

  This dance between humans and machines has just begun, and its steps will determine the rhythm of the future of civilization.