title: 在上海，机器人正加速“进化”
title_translation: In Shanghai, robots are accelerating their evolution
date: 
author: 
origin: china
url: http://kpzg.people.com.cn/n1/2025/0519/c404214-40482389.html
text:在上海张江机器人谷的实验室里，傅利叶智能科技有限公司的工程师正为一台通用人形机器人GR-2调整灵巧手的抓握力度。这台身高1.75米的机器人将被送到康复中心，承担康复训练任务。

50公里外的临港新片区，智元机器人的工厂里，数台远征A2机器人正在流水线上接受最后的功能检测，它们即将奔赴汽车工厂和4S店，成为“数字工人”和“智能销售员”。

在上海，越来越多的人形机器人，正从实验室走向应用场景。依托上海高端制造业基础、长三角完备的供应链及产业配套，人形机器人产业正在加速“进化”。

“降低门槛才能加速生态繁荣”

数据积累，对机器人的智能化提升至关重要。

过去数十年，机器人的行动往往依赖人们的预设规则。想让机器人自主决策、随机应变，需要不断向大模型“投喂”数据，数据量越大，大模型在某一场景的表现就会越接近人类。

数据从哪来？从应用场景的训练中来。

“去年9月，我们启用了行业首个数据采集厂。每天都有100台机器人在这里训练，产生上万条数据，为机器人学习提供‘养料’。”上海智元新创技术有限公司公共事务部副总经理胡静萍介绍，一个简单的倒水动作，数据采集员们需要让机器人重复数百次甚至更多。

训练如此重要，但如果每家企业都自建训练场，成本必然不小。怎么办？上海市说：我来。

今年1月，全国首个异构人形机器人训练场在上海正式启用。这座5000平方米训练场的建设方是国家地方共建人形机器人创新中心，它由央企牵头，联合产业链上下游企业、高校和科研机构共建而成。这是上海扶持培育人形机器人产业、形成“政产学研用”协同创新网络的重要抓手。

记者看到，来自智元、傅利叶、开普勒、上海电气等公司的上百台机器人，正在这里训练行走、叠被子、洗碗、拧螺丝、焊接等技能。今年，训练场有望沉淀1000万条数据，形成业内规模领先的异构人形机器人数据集。

“之所以是‘异构’的训练场，是因为人工智能如果用同质化数据，会产生AI幻觉，所以在打造的时候联合了十几家人形机器人公司，把所有的动作捕捉下来。”国家地方共建人形机器人创新中心首席科学家江磊说，训练场其实就是一个数据生产工厂，未来能产生更多数据提供给企业使用，帮助行业发展。

为了以开放协作突破技术壁垒，2024年，国家地方共建人形机器人创新中心推出了全球首款全尺寸通用人形机器人开源公版机“青龙”，同时启用了全球首个全尺寸人形机器人开源社区“OpenLoong”，吸引全球开发者共享数据，进一步降低研发门槛。“这就像安卓系统对手机产业的意义，降低门槛才能加速生态繁荣。”国家地方共建人形机器人创新中心总经理许彬说。

“用耐心资本支持原始创新”

去年以来，中央文件中多次提到要发展“耐心资本”，主要指不以追求短期收益为首要目标，专注于长期的项目或投资活动，并对风险有较高承受力的资本。

作为未来产业，人形机器人发展正需要耐心资本的扶持。

“每一个创新都是要烧钱的。”上海人形机器人创新孵化器总负责人汪兵说，“中国本土创新，不是偶然事件，是厚积薄发。我们需要用耐心资本、长期资本支持原始创新、颠覆式创新。”

为此，上海市设立百亿级人形机器人产业基金来吸引社会资本。同时，下辖各区县、各条块，也相应建立产业引导基金。2024年，浦东新区筹备的人形机器人子基金，重点投向具身智能、大模型等关键领域。宝山区发布上海首宝智业投资基金，规模约5亿元。今年在上海市科委的支持下，人形机器人创新中心正发起成立一个针对人形机器人垂直领域的2亿元基金。

耐心资本浇灌下，上海人形机器人产业生态日渐繁荣。

明星企业研发呈现加速态势。傅利叶完成近8亿元E轮融资，将与上海国际医学中心携手打造国内首个具身智能康复示范基地。其产品GR-1已实现商业化落地，累计交付超过100台，新一代产品GR-2、Fourier N1相继推出。智元获腾讯领投的B轮融资，估值飙升至150亿元。今年1月，智元量产的第1000台通用具身机器人正式下线；3月，能骑自行车的双足人形机器人灵犀X2正式发布。在核心零部件方面，也涌现出步科股份、鸣志电器、禾赛科技等企业。

“人形机器人将像手机一样普及”

站在张江机器人谷的观景台俯瞰，傅利叶的实验室、智元的工厂、国地中心的训练场次第排布，宛如人形机器人产业的“硅谷”。这里每天有3000名工程师在攻克技术难题，每年孵化20余家初创企业。上海的人形机器人产业链覆盖了从核心零部件研发到整机制造，再到应用场景拓展的各个环节。

“正是因为上游供应链的成熟，我们才有办法在这么短的时间内，造出一台人形机器人。”智元机器人制造部总经理张绍政介绍，人形机器人的许多关键零部件的上游精密加工环节，都与新能源汽车有所交叉，这些精密的零部件能很容易地迁移到人形机器人制造中。

在应用场景方面，上海的人形机器人已广泛渗透到生活的各个角落。在医院里，人形机器人担任“护理师”，协助医护人员照顾患者，为患者提供贴心的服务；在家庭中，它们化身“生活助手”，帮助人们打扫卫生、陪伴老人孩子；在汽车工厂，人形机器人作为“新员工”，熟练地完成零部件的装配工作，提高了生产效率和质量。
translation: In a laboratory in Shanghai Zhangjiang Robot Valley, engineers from Fourier Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd. are adjusting the grip strength of the dexterous hands of a general humanoid robot GR-2. The 1.75-meter-tall robot will be sent to a rehabilitation center to undertake rehabilitation training tasks.

50 kilometers away in the Lingang New Area, in the factory of Zhiyuan Robotics, several Yuanzheng A2 robots are undergoing final functional testing on the assembly line. They will soon go to automobile factories and 4S stores to become "digital workers" and "smart salesmen."

In Shanghai, more and more humanoid robots are moving from laboratories to application scenarios. Relying on Shanghai's high-end manufacturing base and the Yangtze River Delta's complete supply chain and industrial supporting facilities, the humanoid robot industry is accelerating its "evolution".
Data accumulation is crucial to improving the intelligence of robots.

In the past few decades, robots’ actions have often relied on people’s preset rules. If you want robots to make decisions and adapt to changes, you need to continuously “feed” data to the big model. The larger the amount of data, the closer the big model’s performance will be to humans in a certain scenario.

Where does the data come from? From the training of application scenarios.

"Last September, we launched the industry's first data collection plant. Every day, 100 robots are trained here, generating tens of thousands of data, which provide 'nutrients' for robot learning." Hu Jingping, deputy general manager of the public affairs department of Shanghai Zhiyuan New Technology Co., Ltd., introduced that for a simple action of pouring water, data collectors need to let the robot repeat it hundreds of times or even more.

Training is so important, but if every company builds its own training ground, the cost will be high. What to do? Shanghai said: I will do it.

In January this year, the country's first heterogeneous humanoid robot training ground was officially opened in Shanghai. The 5,000-square-meter training ground was built by the National and Local Co-construction Humanoid Robot Innovation Center, which was led by central enterprises and jointly built by upstream and downstream enterprises in the industrial chain, universities and scientific research institutions. This is an important means for Shanghai to support and cultivate the humanoid robot industry and form a collaborative innovation network of "government, industry, academia, research and application".

The reporter saw that hundreds of robots from companies such as Zhiyuan, Fourier, Kepler, and Shanghai Electric were being trained here to learn skills such as walking, folding quilts, washing dishes, screwing, and welding. This year, the training ground is expected to accumulate 10 million pieces of data, forming a leading heterogeneous humanoid robot data set in the industry.

"The reason why it is a 'heterogeneous' training ground is that if artificial intelligence uses homogeneous data, it will produce AI illusions. Therefore, when building it, we joined forces with more than a dozen humanoid robot companies to capture all the movements." Jiang Lei, chief scientist of the National and Local Co-built Humanoid Robot Innovation Center, said that the training ground is actually a data production factory, which will generate more data in the future for enterprises to use and help the development of the industry.

In order to break through technical barriers through open collaboration, in 2024, the National and Local Co-construction Humanoid Robot Innovation Center launched the world's first full-size universal humanoid robot open source public version "Qinglong", and at the same time launched the world's first full-size humanoid robot open source community "OpenLoong", attracting global developers to share data and further lowering the threshold for research and development. "This is like the significance of the Android system to the mobile phone industry. Only by lowering the threshold can the ecological prosperity be accelerated." said Xu Bin, general manager of the National and Local Co-construction Humanoid Robot Innovation Center.

“Use patient capital to support original innovation”

Since last year, central documents have repeatedly mentioned the need to develop "patient capital", which mainly refers to capital that does not pursue short-term returns as its primary goal, focuses on long-term projects or investment activities, and has a higher risk tolerance.

As a future industry, the development of humanoid robots requires the support of patient capital.

"Every innovation costs money," said Wang Bing, general manager of Shanghai Humanoid Robot Innovation Incubator. "China's local innovation is not accidental, but the result of long-term accumulation. We need to use patient capital and long-term capital to support original innovation and disruptive innovation."

To this end, Shanghai has set up a humanoid robot industry fund of tens of billions of yuan to attract social capital. At the same time, the districts, counties and blocks under its jurisdiction have also established industry guidance funds accordingly. In 2024, the humanoid robot sub-fund prepared by Pudong New Area will focus on key areas such as embodied intelligence and large models. Baoshan District has launched the Shanghai Shoubao Zhiye Investment Fund, with a scale of about 500 million yuan. This year, with the support of the Shanghai Science and Technology Commission, the Humanoid Robot Innovation Center is initiating the establishment of a 200 million yuan fund for the vertical field of humanoid robots.

With the support of patient capital, the humanoid robot industry ecosystem in Shanghai is becoming increasingly prosperous.

The research and development of star enterprises is accelerating. Fourier has completed nearly 800 million yuan in E-round financing and will work with Shanghai International Medical Center to build the first embodied intelligent rehabilitation demonstration base in China. Its product GR-1 has been commercialized, with more than 100 units delivered in total, and new generation products GR-2 and Fourier N1 have been launched one after another. Zhiyuan received a B-round financing led by Tencent, and its valuation soared to 15 billion yuan. In January this year, Zhiyuan's 1,000th mass-produced universal embodied robot officially rolled off the assembly line; in March, Lingxi X2, a bipedal humanoid robot that can ride a bicycle, was officially released. In terms of core components, companies such as Buke Co., Ltd., Mingzhi Electric, and Hesai Technology have also emerged.

Standing on the observation deck of Zhangjiang Robot Valley, you can see Fourier's laboratory, Zhiyuan's factory, and the training ground of the National Land Center arranged in sequence, just like the "Silicon Valley" of the humanoid robot industry. 3,000 engineers are working on technical problems every day, and more than 20 start-ups are incubated every year. Shanghai's humanoid robot industry chain covers all aspects from the research and development of core components to the manufacturing of complete machines, and then to the expansion of application scenarios.

"It is precisely because of the maturity of the upstream supply chain that we are able to build a humanoid robot in such a short time." Zhang Shaozheng, general manager of Zhiyuan Robot Manufacturing Department, introduced that the upstream precision processing links of many key components of humanoid robots overlap with new energy vehicles, and these precision components can be easily migrated to humanoid robot manufacturing.

In terms of application scenarios, humanoid robots in Shanghai have been widely used in every corner of life. In hospitals, humanoid robots serve as "nurses" to assist medical staff in caring for patients and provide them with caring services; in families, they serve as "life assistants" to help people clean and accompany the elderly and children; in automobile factories, humanoid robots serve as "new employees" to skillfully complete the assembly of parts and components, improving production efficiency and quality.

"In the future, humanoid robots will be as popular as smartphones," said Jiang Lei.