title: 人形机器人何时进入日常生活？
title_translation: When will humanoid robots enter everyday life?
date: 
author: 
origin: china
url: http://finance.people.com.cn/n1/2025/0212/c1004-40416837.html
text: 　从商用服务到智能制造，从陪伴老人到理货看店……人形机器人制造在“加速跑”，何时能走进寻常百姓生活？

　　人形机器人又称类人机器人、仿生机器人等，通常具有头部、躯干、双臂双腿等，在结构和功能上尽可能接近人类，具备一定的运动能力和感知能力。

　　如今，人形机器人正成为新的“风口”。

　　今年北京市将举办世界人形机器人“一会一赛”，“一会”是指世界人形机器人运动会，“一赛”是指机器人半程马拉松比赛。

　　据深圳新战略传媒有限公司产研所的不完全统计，截至2024年6月，全球人形机器人本体制造企业已超160家，其中中国企业超过60家，是全球人形机器人本体制造企业数量最多的国家。

　　据国际机器人协会预测，2021年到2030年，全球人形机器人市场规模年复合增长率将高达71%。中国电子学会预测，到2030年，中国的人形机器人市场规模有望达到约8700亿元。

　　目前，市场上主流的人形机器人价格不菲，售价在10万元以上，高的甚至超50万元。不少人认为，人形机器人功能有限、价格昂贵，为何相关产业布局不断加速？

　　业内人士表示，人形机器人走热，跟技术发展、市场需求和政策推动等因素密不可分。

　　从技术方面，人工智能与机器学习的进步，使得人形机器人在环境感知和人机交互等方面能力显著增强。硬件技术的发展也推动人形机器人在运动控制等能力上得到提升。

　　去年在北京举办的世界机器人大会上，北京银河通用机器人有限公司旗下GALBOT G1通用人形机器人听到语音指令后，从货架上拣选商品，并精准递交到顾客手上。该款机器人有望在无人药店、商超等商业化场景中得到初步商用。

　　从市场需求看，人口老龄化和劳动力短缺，使得人形机器人的应用场景得到大大拓展。

　　用空气炸锅炸薯条、制作沙拉汉堡、做咖啡、短暂哄娃、叠衣服……2024世界机器人大会上的这些场景，让人们看到人形机器人走入日常生活的更多可能。

　　国家战略层面的重视，也成为引领我国人形机器人产业加速发展的强劲动力。

　　2024年1月，工信部等7部门印发的关于推动未来产业创新发展的实施意见提出，做强未来高端装备，其中人形机器人排在“创新标志性产品”专栏第一位。近年来，北京、上海、广东等多地也提出，重点培育人形机器人等未来产业。

　　乐聚（深圳）机器人技术有限公司董事长冷晓琨认为，人形机器人在工业领域应用最大的意义在于，企业不需要为机械化改造产线。“在走访中我们发现，工厂场景仍有大量环节依赖人工，无法用工业机器人解决。人形机器人可1∶1适配现有生产线，不需要改造即可上岗。”

　　不过，在工厂环节，目前人形机器人还处于小规模试验阶段，只有少部分先进工厂开始探索在某些工作流程中使用，要实现大规模替代人还为时尚早。

　　业内人士预计，人形机器人更多走进产线可能在未来三到五年实现；而真正走进人们的生活，需要更高的精确度和安全性，所需要的时间会更长。

　　深圳市众擎机器人科技有限公司创始人兼市场营销负责人姚淇元建议，尽快完善人形机器人的相关标准，不断开放应用场景，让人形机器人“先应用起来”。

　　“相比国外，中国有着更丰富的应用场景，有助于人形机器人进行充分训练。期待政策、技术、需求共同推动人形机器人产业的发展。”冷晓琨说。
translation: 　From commercial services to intelligent manufacturing, from accompanying the elderly to counting goods and running stores... the manufacturing of humanoid robots is "accelerating", when will it become part of the lives of ordinary people?

　　Humanoid robots, also known as humanoid robots, bionic robots, etc., usually have a head, torso, arms and legs, etc., and are as close to humans as possible in structure and function, and have certain motor and perception abilities.

　　Nowadays, humanoid robots are becoming a new trend.

　　This year, Beijing will host the World Humanoid Robot Games and the Robot Half Marathon.

　　According to incomplete statistics from the Industrial Research Institute of Shenzhen New Strategy Media Co., Ltd., as of June 2024, there are more than 160 humanoid robot manufacturers in the world, of which more than 60 are Chinese companies, making China the country with the largest number of humanoid robot manufacturers in the world.

　　According to the International Federation of Robotics, the global humanoid robot market will have a compound annual growth rate of 71% from 2021 to 2030. The China Institute of Electronics predicts that by 2030, China's humanoid robot market is expected to reach about 870 billion yuan.

　　At present, the mainstream humanoid robots on the market are expensive, with prices exceeding 100,000 yuan, and even exceeding 500,000 yuan. Many people believe that humanoid robots have limited functions and are expensive, so why is the layout of related industries accelerating?

　　Industry insiders said that the popularity of humanoid robots is closely related to factors such as technological development, market demand and policy promotion.

　　From a technical perspective, advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning have significantly enhanced the capabilities of humanoid robots in environmental perception and human-machine interaction. The development of hardware technology has also promoted the improvement of humanoid robots' capabilities in motion control and other aspects.

　　At the World Robot Conference held in Beijing last year, the GALBOT G1 universal humanoid robot produced by Beijing Galaxy General Robot Co., Ltd. picked up goods from the shelves and delivered them accurately to customers after hearing voice commands. The robot is expected to be initially used in commercial scenarios such as unmanned pharmacies and supermarkets.

　　From the perspective of market demand, the aging population and labor shortage have greatly expanded the application scenarios of humanoid robots.

　　Use an air fryer to fry French fries, make salad burgers, brew coffee, briefly soothe children, fold clothes... These scenes at the 2024 World Robot Conference allow people to see more possibilities for humanoid robots to enter daily life.

　　The attention given at the national strategic level has also become a strong driving force for the accelerated development of my country's humanoid robot industry.

　　In January 2024, the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology and seven other departments issued an implementation opinion on promoting the innovative development of future industries, proposing to strengthen future high-end equipment, among which humanoid robots ranked first in the "innovative iconic products" column. In recent years, Beijing, Shanghai, Guangdong and many other places have also proposed to focus on cultivating future industries such as humanoid robots.

　　Leng Xiaokun, chairman of Leju (Shenzhen) Robotics Technology Co., Ltd., believes that the greatest significance of humanoid robots in the industrial field is that companies do not need to transform production lines for mechanization. "During our visits, we found that there are still a lot of links in factory scenes that rely on manual labor and cannot be solved by industrial robots. Humanoid robots can be adapted to existing production lines 1:1 and can be put into use without modification."

　　However, in the factory sector, humanoid robots are still in the small-scale trial stage, and only a small number of advanced factories have begun to explore their use in certain work processes. It is still too early to achieve large-scale replacement of humans.

　　Industry insiders predict that more humanoid robots may enter production lines in the next three to five years; but truly entering people's lives will require higher precision and safety, and it will take longer.

　　Yao Qiyuan, founder and marketing director of Shenzhen Zhongqing Robot Technology Co., Ltd., suggested that the relevant standards for humanoid robots should be improved as soon as possible, and application scenarios should be continuously opened up so that humanoid robots can be "applied first."

　　"Compared with foreign countries, China has richer application scenarios, which is conducive to the full training of humanoid robots. We look forward to policies, technologies, and demands jointly promoting the development of the humanoid robot industry." Leng Xiaokun said.