title: 机器人“步伐”加快 制造业密度达392台/万人
title_translation: Robots are accelerating their pace in manufacturing, with a density of 392 units per 10,000 people
date: 
author: 
origin: china
url: http://ah.people.com.cn/n2/2023/1206/c227131-40667697.html
text: 人形机器人，排成方阵灵活地跳着舞蹈，动作有模有样、整齐划一；机械手臂，玩转起游戏闯关，轻松拿捏，稳如泰山……

12月5日，2023中国机器人产业发展大会的会场外，各式机器人现场“秀技”，不少机器人领域的新技术、新产品、新应用，为大会平添了科技色彩。

中国机器人产业发展大会是由中国机械工业联合会机器人分会主办的全国性行业大会，自2012年以来，已经成功举办了十一届。今年是时隔7年，第二次把会址落在芜湖。

机器人产业既是融机械控制、新一代信息通信技术、人工智能等于一体的新兴产业，更是支撑制造业、服务业数字化、智能化转型的关键产业。

在人们的传统印象中，机器人多被用来搬运、喷涂、组装等简单工作。殊不知，随着机器人技术的更新换代，其应用场景越来越多元化。

工业和信息化部装备工业一司副司长汪宏介绍，近年来，工业机器人呈现系列化发展，从高速、高精到高负载、高可靠的产品不断面世，服务和特种机器人产业化进程加速。仅2023年，就已有43款手术机器人产品和系统获得国家药监局医疗器械注册证。

其中，新能源汽车、锂电池、光伏等新兴产业快速发展；卫浴、陶瓷、五金等传统产业加速转型；消防、排涝、搜救等特殊需求和港珠澳大桥等重大项目带动特种机器人落地应用。

除了制造业，服务领域的机器人也大放异彩。餐饮、导览、物流等领域大批服务机器人“上岗”就业。

截至目前，我国在役工业机器人数量突破150万台，占全球总量的比重超1/3，制造业机器人密度达到392台/万人。

机器人产业的快速发展，对促进制造业数字化网络化智能化发展注入了新动能，提供了新路径，也深刻改变着制造业的生产方式和产业生态。

数据统计，2022年，我国工业机器人产量达到44.3万台，同比增长21%。当年全球工业机器人装机量55.3万台，同比增长5%，而我国的装机量却达到了29万台，占全球装机量的52%。由此可见，我国不仅是全球机器人第一大市场，也是全球机器人第一大生产国。
在位于芜湖城南的奇瑞新能源汽车四期工厂的总装车间，质检线上井然有序，一台台iCAR03款SUV在经过最后的淋雨、动态、面漆检测之后，陆续下线。

iCAR03生产负责人李楠告诉记者，该车间于10月份刚刚启用，正处于爬产阶段。和传统产线不同的是，自动化率是一大亮点。风挡、底盘、座椅、轮胎全部都是机器人总装配，大大节省了人力，提高了效率。

这只是芜湖机器人智能化应用的一个场景。

近年来，人工智能等技术的快速发展，为机器人产业带来了更多可能，让机器人越来越“智能化”，越来越“聪明”。

这次大会恰逢芜湖获批全国首个国家机器人产业集聚区十周年。

十年来，芜湖机器人产业实现了“从无到有”“从弱到强”的发展，实现了工业机器人、服务机器人、系统集成、人工智能及特种装备等于一体的全产业链，集聚了上下游企业220多家，产值突破了300亿元。

成绩不仅如此，芜湖连续六年获评全国最佳机器人产业园奖，连续五年在安徽省机器人产业发展分类考核中排名第一，机器人产业综合实力居全国第八位。毋庸置疑，机器人产业已然成为芜湖产业发展的一张“靓丽名片”。

在芜湖市委书记宁波看来，当前，机器人及人工智能产业发展的关键点在于算力和数据的支撑，对于芜湖而言，有着得天独厚的优势。

如今，芜湖数据中心集群是国家“东数西算”十大集群之一，已成为落户华为云，三大运营商等14个重点项目，总投资超过2500亿元。明年底，芜湖数据中心集群计算规模将超过1万P，未来五年将超3万P，必将为机器人产业发展提供强大的数据支撑和算力赋能。
机器人产业作为新型技术和智能制造的重要装备，在促进制造业数字化发展，智能化升级，不断应用新产业、新业态方面具有重要的作用。

国家智能制造专家委员会主任苏波认为，近年来，我国机器人产业实现了蓬勃发展，在制造业领域得到普及，形成了较为完整的产业链，但国产机器人市场占有率始终徘徊在30%左右。

他指出，机器人的一些关键零部件取得了突破，但未形成系统集成的配套能力。如新能源汽车的焊接、总装生产线，外资品牌机器人仍占主导地位。

那么，如何才能实现机器人的普及应用？随着新型工业化的加速推进，如何让更多领域享受到机器人的红利？

苏波表示，首先要积极推进机器人关键技术能力的提升，开展产学研用联合攻关，加快补齐加工工艺等产业链的短板，打造更多高端化、智能化的机器人产品。

其次，要加快成熟场景的普及应用，推进重要产线系统集成能力的提升，促进各行业数字化、智能化转型升级和进口替代。

而在专业人才培养领域，中国职业教育学会前常务副会长兼秘书长刘占山和苏波的想法不谋而合。

“职业院校的人才培养模式、教育内容、师资水平等方面要适应产业和企业发展需要，大力加强基础学科、新型学科、交叉学科的建设。”刘占山直言，说到底，就是要不断提升原始创新能力和人才培养质量，为解决机器人产业发展的关键核心技术攻关提供人才支撑。

在他看来，只有机器人功能种类更加丰富，人才储备更加完备，应用领域进一步拓展，才能真正实现让机器人赋能千行百业。

translation: Humanoid robots, lined up in a square formation, danced flexibly, their movements were well-organized and in unison; mechanical arms, playing games and passing levels, were as steady as a rock...

On December 5, outside the venue of the 2023 China Robot Industry Development Conference, various robots showed off their skills on site. Many new technologies, new products, and new applications in the field of robotics added a technological touch to the conference.

The China Robot Industry Development Conference is a national industry conference hosted by the Robotics Branch of the China Machinery Industry Federation. It has been successfully held for 11 sessions since 2012. This year is the second time that the venue has been held in Wuhu after a lapse of 7 years.

The robotics industry is not only an emerging industry that integrates mechanical control, new generation information and communication technology, and artificial intelligence, but also a key industry supporting the digital and intelligent transformation of manufacturing and service industries.
In people's traditional impression, robots are mostly used for simple tasks such as handling, spraying, and assembly. However, as robot technology is updated, its application scenarios are becoming more and more diversified.

Wang Hong, deputy director of the Equipment Industry Department of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, introduced that in recent years, industrial robots have shown a series of development, from high-speed, high-precision to high-load, high-reliability products have been launched, and the industrialization process of service and special robots has accelerated. In 2023 alone, 43 surgical robot products and systems have obtained medical device registration certificates from the National Medical Products Administration.

Among them, emerging industries such as new energy vehicles, lithium batteries, and photovoltaics are developing rapidly; traditional industries such as sanitary ware, ceramics, and hardware are accelerating their transformation; special needs such as fire fighting, drainage, search and rescue, and major projects such as the Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macao Bridge are driving the application of special robots.

In addition to manufacturing, robots in the service sector are also shining. A large number of service robots are employed in catering, tour guiding, logistics and other fields.

As of now, the number of industrial robots in service in my country has exceeded 1.5 million, accounting for more than one-third of the global total, and the density of manufacturing robots has reached 392 units per 10,000 people.

The rapid development of the robotics industry has injected new impetus into promoting the digitalization, networking and intelligent development of the manufacturing industry, provided new paths, and profoundly changed the manufacturing industry's production methods and industrial ecology.

According to statistics, in 2022, my country's industrial robot production reached 443,000 units, a year-on-year increase of 21%. The global installed capacity of industrial robots was 553,000 units, a year-on-year increase of 5%, while my country's installed capacity reached 290,000 units, accounting for 52% of the global installed capacity. This shows that my country is not only the world's largest robot market, but also the world's largest robot producer.
In the final assembly workshop of Chery's New Energy Vehicle Phase IV Factory located in the south of Wuhu City, the quality inspection line is in order. After the final rain, dynamic and paint inspections, iCAR03 SUVs are rolling off the production line one after another.

Li Nan, the production manager of iCAR03, told reporters that the workshop was just put into use in October and is in the ramp-up stage. Unlike traditional production lines, the automation rate is a highlight. The windshield, chassis, seats, and tires are all assembled by robots, which greatly saves manpower and improves efficiency.

This is just one scenario of intelligent application of robots in Wuhu.

In recent years, the rapid development of technologies such as artificial intelligence has brought more possibilities to the robotics industry, making robots more "intelligent" and "smarter".

This conference coincides with the tenth anniversary of Wuhu being approved as the first national robotics industry cluster in the country.

Over the past ten years, Wuhu's robotics industry has achieved development from "nothing to something" and "from weak to strong", and has realized a full industrial chain integrating industrial robots, service robots, system integration, artificial intelligence and special equipment, gathering more than 220 upstream and downstream enterprises, and its output value has exceeded 30 billion yuan.

Wuhu has won the National Best Robot Industrial Park Award for six consecutive years, ranked first in the Anhui Province Robot Industry Development Classification Assessment for five consecutive years, and ranked eighth in the country in terms of comprehensive strength of the robot industry. Undoubtedly, the robot industry has become a "beautiful business card" for Wuhu's industrial development.

In the view of Wuhu Municipal Party Committee Secretary Ningbo, the key to the development of the robotics and artificial intelligence industries currently lies in the support of computing power and data, which Wuhu has unique advantages in.

Today, the Wuhu data center cluster is one of the top ten clusters of the country's "East Data West Computing" and has become the home of 14 key projects such as Huawei Cloud and the three major operators, with a total investment of more than 250 billion yuan. By the end of next year, the computing scale of the Wuhu data center cluster will exceed 10,000P, and will exceed 30,000P in the next five years, which will surely provide strong data support and computing power for the development of the robotics industry.
As an important equipment for new technologies and intelligent manufacturing, the robotics industry plays an important role in promoting the digital development of the manufacturing industry, intelligent upgrading, and the continuous application of new industries and new business formats.

Su Bo, director of the National Intelligent Manufacturing Expert Committee, believes that in recent years, my country's robotics industry has achieved vigorous development, has been popularized in the manufacturing field, and has formed a relatively complete industrial chain, but the market share of domestic robots has always hovered around 30%.

He pointed out that some key parts of robots have made breakthroughs, but the supporting capabilities of system integration have not been formed. For example, in the welding and assembly production lines of new energy vehicles, foreign brand robots still dominate.

So, how can we achieve the popularization and application of robots? With the accelerated advancement of new industrialization, how can we make more fields enjoy the benefits of robots?

Su Bo said that first of all, we must actively promote the improvement of key technical capabilities of robots, carry out joint research and development between industry, academia, research and application, speed up the filling of gaps in the industrial chain such as processing technology, and create more high-end and intelligent robot products.

Secondly, we must accelerate the popularization and application of mature scenarios, promote the improvement of system integration capabilities of important production lines, and promote digital and intelligent transformation and upgrading of various industries and import substitution.

In the field of professional talent training, Liu Zhanshan, former executive vice president and secretary-general of the China Vocational Education Society, and Su Bo share the same ideas.

"The talent training model, educational content, and faculty level of vocational colleges must adapt to the needs of industry and enterprise development, and vigorously strengthen the construction of basic disciplines, new disciplines, and interdisciplinary disciplines." Liu Zhanshan said frankly that, in the final analysis, it is necessary to continuously improve original innovation capabilities and talent training quality, and provide talent support for solving key core technology problems in the development of the robotics industry.

In his opinion, only when the functions of robots are more diverse, the talent pool is more complete, and the application areas are further expanded, can we truly realize the goal of robots empowering thousands of industries.